I am working on a clone of Chip's Challenge to try to apply the things I've learned about object-oriented design, especially design patterns. I think the original MS port was built in assembly (but I could be wrong), but I am just using C++, and I am wanting to use Qt for the UI. I am also wanting to make it into a sort of toolkit for extending the CC system, say with custom tilesets and rulesets, to try to simplify the process of making these tile-based kinds of games. My first few thoughts are to have abstract factories for rulesets--to generate ruleset-based mechanics (strategy pattern?) when needed--and tilesets--to get graphics and available tiles. I know that the tile board should also have just two layers, but it might be worthwhile to make that an implementation detail for cases where there are different numbers of layers or dynamic numbers. Also, there are certain advanced mechanics that arise from glitches in the rulesets, and I am wondering if those should be hardcoded in, fixed, or if there should be a sort of extensibility plugin feature that allows for those differences, possibly through the use of the template method pattern? It seems like a large system, and I am not sure I can untangle it all on my own
You can untangle it. The key is to avoid designing “Chip’s Challenge, but generic” all at once. Design a small, solid core for one working ruleset, then make the extension seams explicit.
What you’re describing is really three systems that should not be too tightly coupled:
Core tile-world engine
Board state, entities, movement, collisions, turns/ticks, save/load of level state.
Ruleset layer
What counts as walkable, how monsters move, what keys unlock, how buttons affect traps, timing quirks, win/loss conditions, and even glitch behavior.
Presentation/content layer
Qt UI, rendering, sound, tilesets, editor tooling, asset metadata.
If you separate those cleanly, the project becomes much more manageable.
The most important design decision
Do not make every tile class contain all of its own behavior in a big OOP hierarchy. That tends to look elegant at first, then becomes painful once interactions multiply.
For a Chip’s Challenge style game, a better mental model is:
the board stores state
the ruleset interprets that state
the renderer displays that state
So instead of “a FireTile object decides everything,” prefer something closer to:
tile/entity IDs or data objects represent what exists
rules/services decide what happens when things interact
That makes it much easier to swap rulesets without rewriting the whole engine.
A good high-level architecture
A practical architecture could look like this:
Core domain
GameSession
LevelState
Board
Cell
Actor / Entity
Position, Direction
TileInstance
Inventory
TickResult / GameEvent
These should be mostly UI-agnostic and ruleset-agnostic.
Ruleset API
IRuleset
IRulesetFactory
IMovementPolicy
IInteractionResolver
IWinCondition
IEntityBehavior
ITurnScheduler
You do not necessarily need each of these as separate interfaces on day one, but this is the direction.
Content API
ITileset
ITilePalette
IAssetResolver
IRulesetMetadata
level serializers/loaders
UI/editor
Qt board view
sprite/tileset rendering
input controller
editor tools
inspector/palette/property panes
About abstract factories
Your instinct about abstract factories is good, but I would narrow their job.
Use factories for assembling a family of related components, not for every little mechanic.
For example:
CC1RulesetFactory creates:
movement policy
interaction resolver
monster AI behaviors
win/loss evaluator
timing scheduler
CC2RulesetFactory creates a different family
That is a very natural use of Abstract Factory.
For tilesets, likewise:
ClassicTilesetFactory
ModernTilesetFactory
CustomModTilesetFactory
Each provides graphics, animation metadata, palette definitions, maybe editor grouping.
That said, graphics and mechanics should not be entangled. A tileset should not decide game logic.
Strategy pattern: yes, but in the right places
Yes, strategy fits well, especially for things like:
movement rules
collision resolution
monster decision logic
button/switch linkage semantics
tile animation timing
win condition evaluation
For example, instead of hardcoding monster movement in monster subclasses, you might have:
BugMovementStrategy
TeethMovementStrategy
WalkerMovementStrategy
Then the ruleset decides which strategy an entity uses.
This is cleaner than baking behavior into a giant inheritance tree.
Two layers on the board
You are thinking about this in a healthy way.
I would not hardcode the whole engine around “exactly two layers,” even if classic CC uses that model. But I also would not make the board infinitely abstract from the start.
A good compromise is:
expose the board through an interface like IBoardModel or Board
internally support a small ordered collection of layers
allow rulesets to declare expected layer semantics
For example:
ruleset A may use:
terrain layer
actor layer
ruleset B may use:
ground
item
actor
overlay
Then the classic two-layer model becomes a configuration/contract of a ruleset, not a universal assumption.
You could even define:
LayerRole::Terrain
LayerRole::Item
LayerRole::Actor
LayerRole::Overlay
That gives structure without locking you down.
Glitches and advanced mechanics
This is one of the most interesting parts, and it strongly suggests you should separate intended mechanics from execution semantics.
Do not scatter glitch-specific conditionals everywhere. Instead, treat them as part of a rule profile.
For example:
CC1StrictProfile
CC1MSProfile
CC1WithKnownGlitchesProfile
CustomRulesProfile
A rules profile could specify:
movement update order
collision precedence
simultaneous vs sequential resolution
whether specific overflow/ordering quirks are reproduced
whether certain historical bugs are emulated or fixed
This is better than calling them “plugins” right away. First model them as configurable semantics inside the rules engine.
Then later, if you want, expose plugin hooks.
Template Method: maybe, but use sparingly
Template Method can help when there is a fixed algorithm skeleton with variant steps. For example:
resolve tick
gather intents
sort actors
apply movement
resolve interactions
update board effects
check win/loss
A base RulesetTickProcessor might define that overall flow, while derived classes override specific steps.
That is reasonable.
But I would not lean too heavily on Template Method for extensibility, because it tends to push you into inheritance-heavy design. For a toolkit/modding system, composition usually scales better than inheritance.
So:
use Template Method for a few stable pipelines
use Strategy / composition for most behavior variation
A better extensibility model than “everything is a plugin”
Plugins are appealing, but full plugin architectures are expensive to get right early.
Instead, think in levels of extensibility:
Level 1: data-driven
Allow custom tilesets, tile metadata, level files, entity definitions, and maybe editor palettes through JSON/XML/YAML.
Level 2: scripted/custom rule hooks
Allow mods to define behaviors through a scripting layer or declarative rule language.
Level 3: native plugins
Allow compiled extensions that implement interfaces.
For your project, Level 1 plus maybe some Level 2 hooks is probably enough at first.
Native plugin systems in C++ can get messy fast:
ABI issues
versioning
dynamic loading headaches
platform-specific behavior
If you want a “toolkit,” a data-driven engine with well-defined rule hooks often gives most of the benefit without the pain.
A clean way to model gameplay
One strong approach is to make each tick proceed through a predictable pipeline:
collect player input
ask each actor for an intended action
validate actions under the current ruleset
resolve conflicts/interactions
mutate board state
emit gameplay events
let UI animate/render those events
That leads nicely to patterns like:
Command for actions/intents
Observer/Event Bus for reporting state changes to UI/editor/replay systems
Strategy for rule variation
Abstract Factory for assembling ruleset families
State in a few places if entities have modes
Prototype if you want reusable entity/tile templates from content definitions
This is more robust than having the UI directly poke the game state.
Consider an event-based core
This kind of game benefits a lot from explicit events, such as:
actor moved
item collected
door unlocked
trap toggled
entity killed
chip count changed
level completed
Why this helps:
Qt UI can animate from events
sound system can subscribe to events
replay/undo can record events or commands
debugging becomes easier
editor simulation becomes easier
So a ruleset tick might return a TickResult containing:
updated state
list of emitted events
status flags
That is a very clean boundary.
How to avoid overengineering
You probably do not need all of these on day one:
plugins
multiple rulesets
arbitrary layer counts
full editor
scripting
replay
glitch emulation profiles
Build in this order instead:
Phase 1
Make one playable CC-like ruleset with:
board
player movement
walls/floors
keys/doors
chips/socket/exit
simple monsters
tick/update loop
Qt rendering
Phase 2
Refactor toward explicit interfaces:
IRuleset
ITileset
event system
entity behavior strategies
Phase 3
Add toolkit features:
custom tilesets
rule profiles
editor
data-driven content
Phase 4
Only then consider:
scripting
plugins
multiple full rulesets
glitch-emulation modes
That way the abstractions are shaped by a real game, not by guesses.
What I would recommend concretely
If I were structuring this in C++, I would aim for these central interfaces/classes:
GameSession
LevelState
Board
IRuleset
RulesetFactory
ITileset
Renderer
GameAction
GameEvent
TickProcessor
And I would make the ruleset own or provide:
movement resolver
interaction resolver
turn order policy
win/loss evaluator
entity behavior registry
That gives you extension points without drowning in class explosion.
One design trap to avoid
Do not make “tile type” and “behavior” the same thing.
A tile may need:
appearance
collision properties
triggers
editor metadata
serialization name
special interaction rules
If you put all of that into one inheritance hierarchy, it gets rigid. Prefer a composition-oriented design where tile/entity definitions can reference behavior components or IDs interpreted by the ruleset.
One possible mental model
Think of the engine as:
data: what exists
rules: what it means
events: what happened
renderer: how it looks
That is the cleanest way to support both faithful emulation and creative extension.
My strongest recommendation on the glitch question
Do this:
support a canonical internal engine
allow rule profiles that change execution semantics
treat glitches as optional compatibility modes, not as random hacks
So instead of hardcoding “buggy behavior,” define named semantics like:
“classic MS-compatible timing”
“strict/fixed timing”
“modded/custom timing”
That makes the weirdness intentional and testable.
Final thought
This is a great project for learning object-oriented design, but it will teach you even more if you let yourself use data-oriented ideas and composition where they fit, instead of forcing everything into classical inheritance.
The real win here is not “which pattern do I use,” but:
what should vary
what should stay stable
where do I put the seams
For your case:
stable core: board state, ticks, events, serialization boundaries
variable seams: rules, behaviors, content, rendering
A very good next step would be to sketch a minimal class/interface diagram for just:
Board
LevelState
IRuleset
GameAction
GameEvent
ITileset
and then walk one example through it, like “player moves onto key, picks it up, unlocks door later.”
Yeah that makes sense. I learned inheritance-oriented first, so switching to composition-oriented is still difficult for me, especially since I don't do much OOP anyway. Perhaps I could even include a "workbench" app that allows one to define new tileset/ruleset profiles with a simple interface and maybe a scripting language to define new tiles/rules within the app or change existing behaviors in a copy of the base ruleset. It would have to work with existing players and editors, like Tile World, Chip's Controls, and CCLD/ChipEdit. What you were saying about intended behaviors vs behavior profiles is interesting because MSCC has most of the glitches and Tile World has some of them but patched most of them, and there is also the distinction between Lynx and Pedantic Lynx, which is supposed to be closer to the original Atari Lynx game. Will I need a system layer for portability between platforms? Oh it might be interesting to have level simulation directly in the editor as well as the option to test in external players like TW and MSCC. 
Yes — a thin platform/system layer is a good idea, but not a giant one.
Since you’re already using C++ + Qt, Qt will handle a lot of portability for you: windowing, input, timers, file dialogs, images, text, and general app structure. So you probably do not need a heavy separate portability framework the way an emulator or game engine from scratch might.
What you likely do want is a small boundary between:
engine/domain
application/UI
OS/Qt services
That way your core logic does not become “the Qt game.”
A practical layering
I would think of it like this:
1. Core engine layer
Pure gameplay/domain code.
This contains:
board state
entity/tile instances
rulesets and behavior profiles
tick simulation
event generation
level serialization model
replay/test logic
This layer should know nothing about:
Qt widgets
QPixmap
QTimer
filesystem dialogs
platform-specific APIs
2. Application/service layer
Glue code that coordinates engine + tools.
This contains:
editor document/session management
test-play session control
import/export pipeline
workbench profile loading
scripting integration
launching external players
undo/redo orchestration
This layer can depend on the engine, and can use Qt if convenient, but ideally it still keeps UI details from leaking into the engine.
3. UI/platform layer
Qt widgets/views and system integration.
This contains:
board rendering
property panels
palette browser
animation playback
menu actions
keyboard mapping
drag/drop
file dialogs
process launching
timers/audio
That is probably enough. So yes, a “system layer” exists, but it can stay thin.
On portability specifically
If you want your project to run on Windows, Linux, and maybe macOS, you can keep portability manageable by isolating just a few concerns behind interfaces:
time/tick source
file access / paths
process launching
logging
input mapping
optional audio backend
Qt already covers much of this. So instead of a full “system abstraction layer,” you might just define a few small service interfaces like:
IClock
IFileSystem
IProcessLauncher
ILogger
and provide Qt-based implementations.
That gives you portability and testability without overbuilding.
Your workbench idea is actually very strong
A workbench app is a much more compelling direction than only making a player clone.
Because then the project becomes:
a player
an editor
a ruleset/tileset authoring environment
a compatibility lab
That is ambitious, but it also gives your abstractions a real purpose.
I would frame the workbench around profiles and content packages.
For example:
Tileset profile
Defines:
tile IDs
sprite sheets / animations
editor palette groups
optional display metadata
mapping from logical tile kinds to assets
Ruleset profile
Defines:
movement timing
collision semantics
actor update order
tile interaction rules
win/loss conditions
compatibility flags
optional script hooks
Compatibility profile
Defines:
import/export mappings
external player assumptions
glitch emulation switches
file format behavior
This is where your intended behavior vs behavior profile distinction becomes very powerful.
I think you should explicitly model three things
You’ve already started circling this, and I think naming them will help:
1. Ruleset
“What game is this?”
Examples:
MSCC rules
Lynx rules
custom derived rules
This is the big semantic package.
2. Behavior profile
“How faithfully or differently is this ruleset executed?”
Examples:
exact MS compatibility
patched MS
Tile World-style approximation
Pedantic Lynx
custom bugfix mode
This controls quirks, timing, edge cases, and historical oddities.
3. Presentation profile
“How is it shown/edited?”
Examples:
classic tileset
modern HD tileset
editor-friendly debug tiles
accessibility tileset
That separation will keep things much cleaner than trying to cram all of that into one “ruleset object.”
About compatibility with Tile World, Chip’s Controls, CCLD, ChipEdit
This is where you want to be careful: compatibility is partly a file-format problem and partly a semantics problem.
Those are not the same.
File format compatibility
This is about:
reading/writing level packs
metadata fields
tile encodings
pack naming
password/author fields
layer representations
This suggests import/export adapters.
Semantic compatibility
This is about:
actor timing
movement order
collision quirks
trap/cloner logic
teleport behavior
glitch preservation
RNG quirks if applicable
This suggests testable ruleset/behavior profiles.
So I would avoid saying “my editor supports Tile World” unless you specify whether you mean:
imports TW-compatible formats
exports levels playable in TW
simulates TW-compatible behavior
launches TW for testing
Those are four different capabilities.
Testing in external players
That is a very good feature, but I would treat it as an integration tool, not a primary engine design constraint.
For example, the editor/workbench could support:
“Open in Tile World”
“Export and test in MSCC”
“Run in local compatibility target”
Internally this could be something like an ExternalRunner service with configuration per target:
executable path
command-line format
temporary export format
working directory
profile compatibility check
That gives you external-player support without distorting your engine architecture around those programs.
Simulation directly in the editor
Yes — this is one of the best ideas in the whole project.
It strongly suggests you should make the engine usable as a headless simulation core.
That means the editor can:
step one tick
run/pause
inspect state
reset to level start
show event traces
maybe visualize actor intents/debug overlays
That is hugely valuable for both creators and for your own debugging.
It also pushes you toward the right architecture:
editor owns a level document
simulation creates a runtime copy of level state
engine runs on the copy
UI renders both static edit state and runtime preview state as needed
So the editor and player are both clients of the same simulation core.
That is exactly what you want.
A really useful architectural split for the editor
You may want to distinguish:
LevelDefinition: the authored level data
LevelState: the mutable runtime state during play/simulation
That way:
the editor edits LevelDefinition
test play creates a LevelState from it
simulation mutates LevelState
reset just rebuilds from LevelDefinition
This will save you a lot of pain.
About scripting
Scripting is probably the right place for custom behavior, but I would add it in stages.
Good first use of scripting
custom triggers
custom tile reactions
rule overrides at named hook points
editor-time validation helpers
metadata-driven behaviors
Harder use of scripting
replacing the whole simulation pipeline
deep low-level movement semantics
arbitrary mutation of engine internals
I would not start with “scripts can do anything.” That becomes chaos fast.
A better model is:
base ruleset defines stable hook points
scripts may extend or override certain decisions
engine still controls overall lifecycle
That fits well with your earlier Template Method thought, but in a composition-based way.
For instance, the tick pipeline stays fixed, but certain steps call into rule/script hooks.
Composition-oriented way to think about it
Since shifting away from inheritance is still uncomfortable, here is a concrete reframing:
Instead of asking:
“What subclasses do I need?”
ask:
“What responsibilities vary independently?”
For your project, these vary independently:
how the board is stored
how rendering works
how a tile looks
how a tile behaves
how movement is resolved
how compatibility quirks are applied
how a level is imported/exported
how the editor exposes palettes/tools
how external players are launched
Those should not all be in one inheritance tree.
Composition says:
make small pieces responsible for one kind of variation
assemble them into a ruleset/app/editor
So a custom ruleset might be built out of:
movement resolver
interaction resolver
actor behavior registry
timing policy
compatibility profile
hook/script registry
That is much easier to reason about than class CustomGlitchyPedanticLynxRulesetWithPatchedTeleports : public ...
About the behavior-profile idea
I think this is one of the strongest abstractions in your design.
You could think of the compatibility space as:
Ruleset family: MS, Lynx, custom
Behavior profile: strict, patched, pedantic, historical, experimental
Content profile: tileset/assets/editor metadata
Then something like “Pedantic Lynx” is not a totally separate engine. It is:
Lynx ruleset family
pedantic behavior profile
Likewise:
Tile World MS mode
MS-style ruleset family
TW-patched profile
Even if the exact boundaries shift later, that mental model is very useful.
One thing I would strongly recommend
Build a conformance test suite early.
Because once you care about:
MSCC glitches
Tile World partial fixes
Lynx vs Pedantic Lynx
external-player compatibility
you are no longer just building a game — you are building a behaviorally sensitive simulator.
That means you need tests like:
given this level fragment and input sequence, actor ends at X
teleport resolves in this order
trap/cloner timing behaves this way
block interaction succeeds/fails here
level completes/fails on this tick
A good setup would let each test specify:
initial level state
behavior profile
input sequence
expected final state or event trace
This will matter more than almost any design pattern.
My recommendation on scope
You have a lot of very good ideas, but I would structure the roadmap like this:
Stage 1
Make a clean headless engine with:
LevelDefinition
LevelState
IRuleset
one concrete ruleset
event stream
testable tick loop
Stage 2
Add Qt player UI.
Stage 3
Add editor with in-editor simulation.
Stage 4
Add profile system:
ruleset family
behavior profile
tileset profile
Stage 5
Add import/export compatibility and external-player launch.
Stage 6
Add workbench authoring and limited scripting.
That order keeps the foundation from collapsing under the tool ambitions.
Answering your portability question directly
So: yes, but keep it small.
You probably do not need a grand “system layer” in the traditional sense. With Qt, what you want is more like:
a pure engine core
a thin app/service layer
Qt-based adapters for platform stuff
That will give you portability, testability, and room for the editor/workbench without turning the project into architecture soup.
Answering your editor-simulation question directly
Yes, absolutely do it.
In-editor simulation is one of the strongest reasons to keep your engine:
UI-agnostic
deterministic
event-driven
resettable from a LevelDefinition
That feature will also help you debug ruleset differences and compatibility modes.
My strongest recommendation from here
Write down a very small first version of these concepts:
LevelDefinition
LevelState
IRuleset
BehaviorProfile
TickResult
GameEvent
ExternalRunner
and then test one scenario across them, like:
player moves onto chip
chip count updates
socket opens
player exits level
If you want, I can help you sketch a concrete C++/Qt class layout for the engine/editor/workbench split next.
Are there better tools than C++ and Qt for this project? Those were the first things that came to mind because I've used C++ a lot and Qt I know is often used for interfaces, but I'm not sure if they're necessarily the best choice. I think C++ is good because I can also manage efficiency more precisely too. I can imagine allowing direct changes in the level simulation to help shape the final level design and so someone wouldn't have to just remember the changes they want to make, but I'm not sure how I could incorporate that or if it would even be worth trying to implement. Maybe allowing staging of changes and then committing to the LevelDefinition (making sure that any possible overwrites are confirmed first)?
C++ and Qt are good choices, just not the only good ones.
For this project, the best stack depends less on raw performance and more on what kind of pain you want to accept:
engine architecture pain
tooling/editor pain
cross-platform UI pain
content/modding pain
iteration speed pain
For a Chip’s Challenge-style toolkit with a player, editor, simulation, import/export, and maybe scripting, the stack has to support both a game engine core and a desktop toolchain. That is why Qt came to mind, and that instinct is reasonable.
My honest take
If your goals are:
learn software design deeply
build a reusable engine/toolkit
have a serious desktop editor/workbench
stay close to systems-level control
use languages/tools you already know
then C++ + Qt is a very defensible choice.
If your goals are more like:
get to a playable prototype fast
make the editor quickly
script/mod behavior easily
avoid fighting C++ complexity
then there are stacks that may be easier.
C++ strengths here
C++ is strong for this project because:
deterministic simulation is easy to structure well
value types and explicit ownership fit engine code nicely
performance will be more than enough
native desktop integration is solid
you can separate engine/editor cleanly
plugin or scripting embeddings are possible later
But the real reason to use C++ here is not speed. A Chip’s Challenge clone does not need C++ for performance. The real advantages are:
you already know it
it supports strong architecture for a long-lived toolkit
it gives you good control over data structures and boundaries
That said, C++ also makes it easier to overcomplicate things and spend lots of time on plumbing.
Qt strengths here
Qt is especially attractive because your project is not just “a game.” It is also:
an editor
a workbench
an asset/profile manager
a simulator/debugger
maybe an external-runner front end
Qt is very good for desktop tools with:
panels
menus
dock widgets
file dialogs
tree views
property inspectors
custom rendering widgets
That is a much better fit for Qt than for many game-first frameworks.
So if you imagine something like:
level canvas
tile palette
ruleset profile editor
simulation controls
event trace/debug panel
asset browser
Qt fits naturally.
The main downside of C++ + Qt
The downside is not that it is “bad.” The downside is that it can become heavy:
build system complexity
object lifetime complexity
UI boilerplate
signals/slots mixed with your domain logic if you are not careful
slower iteration than a scripting-heavy stack
If you go this route, the biggest discipline you need is:
keep Qt out of the engine core.
That means:
no QObject in core domain types
no QPixmap in rules/board/entities
no Qt containers unless you consciously want them there
Qt lives in adapters/UI/app layers
If you do that, C++ + Qt stays pretty clean.
Better alternatives, depending on your goals
1. C# + Godot
This is probably the strongest non-C++ alternative if you want faster development.
Why it could be better:
quicker UI and rendering iteration
scene tools and asset workflows
easier scripting/modding direction
C# is less cumbersome than C++
editor-style tooling is still possible
Why it could be worse:
desktop workbench/editor UIs are less natural than in Qt
less “tool application” feel than a real desktop framework
external compatibility/import-export tool workflows may feel more improvised
if you care a lot about a clean engine/tool separation, you have to enforce it yourself
This is a strong choice if your center of gravity is “game with tools.”
2. C# + Avalonia or WPF
If the project is really more of a desktop toolkit with a simulation engine, C# plus a desktop UI framework is a serious contender.
Why it could be better:
much faster UI/editor development
easier serialization, reflection, tooling
easier scripting integration story
less friction than C++
very good for inspectors/property grids/document-based editors
Why it could be worse:
WPF is Windows-first
Avalonia is cross-platform, but the ecosystem is smaller than Qt
less natural for low-level engine experimentation if you specifically want C++
This is a very good choice if your favorite outcome is “professional-feeling editor/workbench.”
3. Python + Qt / PySide
This could be excellent for a prototype, especially for the editor/workbench.
Why it could be better:
very fast iteration
scripting comes almost for free
editor/workbench features are much easier to build
import/export and tooling tasks are pleasant
Why it could be worse:
the codebase can get messy if the project grows
packaging and deployment can be more annoying
simulation performance is still probably fine here, but architecture quality depends on discipline
less satisfying if your goal is to practice C++ design
This is a strong option if the main challenge is tool design rather than engine performance.
4. Rust + egui / iced / Qt bindings
This is attractive on paper, but I would not recommend it unless you specifically want to learn Rust as part of the project.
You would likely spend too much effort on the stack rather than the game/toolkit itself.
My actual recommendation
Given what you said, I would recommend one of these two:
Best for your stated goals
C++ + Qt
Use this if:
you want to grow in design/architecture
you already know C++ well
you want a real editor/workbench
you care about a reusable engine core
you are okay with more setup and slower iteration
Best for faster progress
C# + desktop/UI framework
Either Godot+C# or Avalonia+C# depending on whether game-side or tool-side matters more.
Use this if:
you want to move faster
you want easier scripting and tooling
you do not specifically need C++
you want less architectural friction
So: are there better tools? Yes, depending on priority. But C++ + Qt is not a bad pick at all. In fact, for a desktop-heavy toolkit/editor, it may be one of the better ones.
About “efficiency more precisely”
That is true, but I would be careful not to overweight it.
This project is unlikely to be bottlenecked by raw compute unless you do something unusual like:
giant batch simulations
heavy search/solver systems
very large levels with many actors
complex scripting overhead
For ordinary play/editor simulation, even much higher-level stacks would probably be fast enough.
So choose C++ because:
you like it
you know it
it matches the architecture you want
not because the game needs extreme optimization.
About applying simulation changes back into the level
That is a really interesting idea, and yes, I think it can be worth doing — but only if you define the semantics carefully.
Because there are two very different kinds of runtime changes:
1. Authorial edits discovered through simulation
Example:
“this block position is better”
“this monster should start one tile left”
“this trap connection should be changed”
“I want the level to begin from this adjusted setup”
These are meaningful edits to the LevelDefinition.
2. Ephemeral play-state changes
Example:
collected keys
toggled buttons
opened doors during play
moved monsters mid-run
temporary inventory state
current timer
current RNG state
These usually should not be written back directly as authored level content.
So you need a way to distinguish:
changes that are design edits
changes that are just consequences of playing
That distinction is the heart of the feature.
A good model for this
I would think in terms of:
LevelDefinition: authored source of truth
LevelState: runtime state derived from it
EditableProjection or StagedEdits: a set of author-approved changes extracted from runtime
Then simulation can offer commands like:
“Use current actor positions as new starting positions”
“Apply tile changes made during simulation”
“Keep trap/cloner rewiring”
“Discard inventory/time/progress state”
“Promote selected runtime changes to level definition”
That is better than blindly committing all of LevelState back into LevelDefinition.
The safest approach
The safest and cleanest way is exactly what you suggested: staging changes before commit.
A workflow could be:
User runs simulation from the editor.
During simulation, they make live edits or observe desirable resulting states.
The system computes a diff between original LevelDefinition and a candidate authored state.
The diff is shown in a review panel.
User chooses which changes to apply.
Conflicts/overwrites are confirmed.
Selected changes are committed.
That is a very strong design.
The important part
Do not think of it as “commit simulation state.”
Think of it as:
extract authorable edits from a simulation session.
That framing makes the feature much easier to reason about.
A useful way to structure those staged changes
You could represent them as edit operations, like:
SetTerrainTile(x, y, tileId)
SetActorStartPosition(actorId, pos)
AddActor(...)
RemoveActor(actorId)
SetLink(buttonId, targetId)
ChangeTileProperty(tileId, property, value)
Then the editor already knows how to apply them, undo them, preview them, and serialize them.
This also fits neatly with undo/redo.
So instead of pushing raw runtime state back into the level, you generate a set of editor commands.
That is much more robust.
When this feature is worth it
It is worth it if you expect workflows like:
simulate a puzzle and tweak monster/block starts interactively
set up contraptions by moving things into place
test timings and preserve the improved arrangement
design from emergent interactions rather than from static editing only
It is probably not worth implementing early if you are still trying to get:
core engine
basic editor
ruleset separation
import/export
working.
So I would mark it as a strong phase 2 or phase 3 feature, not an MVP feature.
My recommendation on stack and scope
If you pick C++ + Qt, I would do this:
make the engine pure C++
make the editor/workbench Qt
treat runtime-to-author edits as staged editor commands
postpone full script/plugin support
postpone “commit from simulation” until after basic simulation and editor are working
That gives you a sane path.
If you want, I can next sketch a concrete stack decision table for:
C++ + Qt
C# + Godot
C# + Avalonia
Python + Qt
with tradeoffs specifically for your player/editor/workbench goals.
Yeah, let's go with C++ + Qt. What roadmap should I expect, since there are a lot of mechanics and rules to implement and lots of other things that should be done? I probably don't need too much documentation for the CC-specific things, since that's all available online and my goal is not to replace existing resources
A good roadmap for C++ + Qt here is less about “implement every CC mechanic in order” and more about building the project so that each stage leaves you with something real, testable, and reusable.
Since your goal is not to replace the community’s CC documentation, your project docs can stay focused on:
how your engine/toolkit is structured
what your current compatibility target is
what is implemented vs not
how to extend it
That keeps the scope sane.
The overall shape
I would split the roadmap into six tracks that advance together:
Engine core
Ruleset implementation
Qt player UI
Editor
Compatibility/import-export
Workbench/extensibility
You do not want to do all of one track before touching the others. Instead, move in layers.
Phase 0: Project setup and architecture skeleton
Before implementing gameplay, set up the project structure so you do not have to rip it apart later.
Goal
Have a compilable workspace with clear module boundaries.
Suggested structure
Something like:
cckit-core
cckit-rules-ms
cckit-ui-qt
cckit-editor
cckit-tests
cckit-tools or cckit-workbench
If that feels too big, combine some at first, but still keep a conceptual split.
At this stage, create:
LevelDefinition
LevelState
Board
IRuleset
TickResult
GameEvent
Tileset abstraction
basic test harness
Deliverable
A project that builds, runs tests, and can instantiate an empty level.
This phase is boring, but it is what makes the rest survivable.
Phase 1: Minimal headless engine
This is the most important phase.
Goal
Make a headless, deterministic simulation core with one tiny playable ruleset subset.
No Qt graphics needed yet beyond maybe a debug print if you want one.
Implement first
Only enough mechanics to prove the architecture:
rectangular board
terrain + actor distinction
player
walls
floor
one collectible
one exit
simple move blocking
win condition
one-tick step function
event emission
Think: “Can a player move around a small level, collect required items, and exit?”
Avoid for now
monsters
buttons/traps/cloners
ice/force floors
teleporters
glitch handling
animation
sound
editor
Deliverable
Automated tests like:
player blocked by wall
item collected
exit locked before chip count met
exit completes level after requirement met
This gives you the simulation spine.
Phase 2: Basic Qt player
Now hook the engine to a minimal UI.
Goal
Be able to load a small hardcoded level and play it in a Qt window.
Implement
board view widget
keyboard input
simple rendering
level reset
status bar with inventory/chip count/time if needed
tick stepping or frame loop
Use ugly placeholder graphics if needed. Do not wait for proper tiles.
Important rule
Qt consumes engine events and displays engine state.
Qt should not define game logic.
Deliverable
A tiny playable prototype.
This is a morale phase. It makes the project feel real.
Phase 3: Core CC ruleset slice
Now expand from “generic tile game” into a real CC-compatible subset.
Goal
Implement the most foundational CC mechanics cleanly.
Suggested order
I would do these in roughly this order:
Static progression mechanics
chips / socket
keys / doors
boots
hazards like water/fire if your target ruleset needs them early
Push/interact basics
movable blocks
block push rules
simple occupancy/conflict rules
Board-affecting mechanisms
buttons
traps
cloners
Motion-affecting terrain
ice
force floors
slide mechanics
directional constraints
Advanced movement spaces
teleporters
thin walls / special directional blockers
toggle walls if relevant
Enemies
Start with one or two simple monsters first, then the rest.
Do not try to implement all monsters at once. Each monster is really a movement policy plus interaction semantics.
Deliverable
A playable subset that can handle a decent number of classic-style levels.
Phase 4: Test suite and behavior locking
This phase should begin early, but it becomes critical here.
Goal
Prevent the engine from turning into “it kinda works except in weird cases.”
Add
scenario-based tests
movement-order tests
interaction precedence tests
regression tests for bug fixes
level playback/input sequence tests
For example:
given this board and this input sequence, final state is X
trap opens on tick N
block enters water and becomes X
teleporter destination resolution behaves as expected
Very important
As soon as you encounter a tricky rule, write a focused test before or while implementing it.
Because once you get into:
update ordering
simultaneous-looking interactions
historical quirks
you will otherwise lose confidence in the engine.
Deliverable
A real compatibility test bed.
Phase 5: Ruleset family + behavior profiles
Once one concrete ruleset mostly works, then generalize.
Not before.
Goal
Separate:
ruleset family
behavior profile
presentation profile
At this stage, refactor so you can express things like:
MS ruleset + strict profile
MS ruleset + patched profile
Lynx ruleset + pedantic profile
Even if only one or two combinations exist at first.
Practical refactors
movement ordering policy becomes swappable
collision semantics become swappable
teleporter behavior can vary by profile
bug-compatibility flags move out of ad hoc conditionals
Deliverable
A system where compatibility quirks are configurable and testable instead of scattered.
Phase 6: Real file support and compatibility adapters
Only now would I seriously focus on external compatibility.
Goal
Import/export real CC-related formats and separate serialization from gameplay.
Add
level parser(s)
pack metadata support
tileset/resource mapping
version/format adapters
error reporting for unsupported constructs
Keep separate
file format compatibility
simulation compatibility
Those two will constantly tempt you to mix them. Resist that.
Deliverable
You can open external levels, play them in your engine, and eventually export supported subsets.
Phase 7: Basic editor
Once the engine and serialization are real enough, build the editor.
Goal
Support comfortable level authoring and testing.
First editor features
place/remove tiles
set player/enemy starts
palette of tiles
save/load
undo/redo
property panel for special tiles/entities
test current level in embedded simulation
Structure
Editor edits LevelDefinition, not LevelState.
Test play creates a runtime copy.
Deliverable
A usable level editor with embedded playtest.
Phase 8: In-editor simulation and staged commit-back
This is where your earlier idea fits.
Goal
Allow simulation-assisted authoring without corrupting authored data.
Add
pause/run/step simulation
inspect runtime state
select runtime changes to preserve
stage authorable diffs
commit selected diffs to LevelDefinition
Examples:
keep new block start position
preserve changed monster placement
apply rewired linkages
discard temporary inventory/time state
Deliverable
A powerful creator workflow that goes beyond a standard level editor.
This is a very interesting differentiator for your project.
Phase 9: Workbench for rulesets/tilesets
This is where the project becomes the toolkit you originally imagined.
Goal
Allow people to define or derive content/rules without editing C++ source directly.
Start with tilesets first
Tilesets are safer and easier than rulesets.
Tileset workbench
import sprite sheet
map sprites to logical tile/entity IDs
define palette organization
animation metadata
preview in player/editor
Then ruleset profiles
At first, let users configure:
compatibility flags
movement timing
selected interaction policies
enabled tile set
win-condition variants
Only later think about scripting custom rules.
Deliverable
Data-driven customization before full scripting.
Phase 10: Scripting or plugin hooks
This is late-stage.
Goal
Support deeper rule customization without hardcoding everything.
Recommendation
Start with a restricted scripting model:
named hook points
controlled access to state
stable API surface
Examples:
onEnterTile
onUseItem
onActorBlocked
onTickStart
onTickEnd
Do not start with “scripts can mutate anything.” That will make compatibility and debugging painful.
Deliverable
A stable extension story.
What order should you implement mechanics in?
For actual CC mechanics, I would use this order:
Group 1: foundational
movement into empty space
walls
collectible chips
socket / exit
keys / doors
inventory basics
Group 2: physical interactions
pushable blocks
water/fire interactions
boots
simple directional restrictions
Group 3: control systems
buttons
traps
cloners
toggle mechanics
Group 4: forced movement
ice
force floors
slide continuation
turning corners if applicable to target ruleset
Group 5: transport/special topology
teleporters
special directional walls
thin walls
one-way effects
Group 6: actors
simple enemy movement
chase logic
random or semi-random movement if relevant
enemy collision/player death resolution
Group 7: quirks and compatibility
update-order edge cases
simultaneous resolution oddities
glitch reproduction flags
exact profile-specific semantics
That keeps you from drowning in the weird stuff too early.
What documentation you actually need
You probably need less “mechanics explanation” and more “project explanation.”
I would keep just five core docs.
1. README
Very short:
what the project is
current status
how to build
modules
supported rulesets/features
2. Architecture note
A few pages at most:
LevelDefinition vs LevelState
engine vs Qt UI
ruleset vs behavior profile vs tileset
event flow
3. Compatibility matrix
Simple table:
mechanic
implemented?
tested?
supported profiles
known differences
This will be more useful than prose.
4. Extension note
How to add:
a new tileset
a new behavior profile
maybe a new tile or actor behavior
5. Testing note
How scenario tests are structured.
That is enough.
A realistic milestone roadmap
Here is the version I would actually follow.
Milestone 1: Headless micro-engine
2–6 weeks, depending on pace.
board/state
player movement
item collection
win condition
tests
Milestone 2: Minimal Qt player
render board
accept input
reset level
play tiny levels
Milestone 3: Foundational CC subset
chips/socket
keys/doors
blocks
hazards
boots
Milestone 4: Interaction-heavy mechanics
buttons
traps
cloners
more terrain semantics
Milestone 5: Forced movement + enemies
ice
force floors
teleporters
core monsters
Milestone 6: Compatibility stabilization
scenario tests
behavior profiles
tricky rule cleanup
Milestone 7: File support
import/export
actual pack/level files
error handling
Milestone 8: Editor
place tiles
save/load
embedded simulation
Milestone 9: Simulation-assisted authoring
staged diffs
selective commit-back
Milestone 10: Workbench/extensibility
tileset authoring
profile editing
limited scripting
What to postpone aggressively
Postpone these until the core is stable:
full plugin ABI system
deep scripting
multiple ruleset families at once
polished art pipeline
networked collaboration
replacing community documentation
external-player integration beyond simple launch/export
every known historical glitch
Those are all good ideas, just dangerous early.
My strongest advice
Pick one concrete compatibility target first.
For example:
“MS-style baseline”
or
“Lynx-style baseline”
Then write the engine to allow later variation, but do not try to implement MS, Tile World, Lynx, and Pedantic Lynx all at once.
That single decision will simplify almost everything:
mechanic order
tests
level expectations
profile design
debugging
First week recommendation
If you want a very concrete starting plan, I would do this first:
Create the project skeleton.
Implement LevelDefinition, LevelState, Board, Position, Direction.
Define IRuleset::step(...).
Add GameEvent and TickResult.
Implement movement into floor/wall.
Add one collectible and one exit mechanic.
Write 8–15 tests.
Only then open a Qt window and render the board.
That gives you the right spine before the fun complexity arrives.
I can sketch a concrete folder structure and class list for Milestone 1 next.
Yeah
Here’s a solid Milestone 1 layout for C++ + Qt that keeps the core clean and gives you room to grow.
Project structure
You can start with one repo and a few top-level modules:
cckit/
  CMakeLists.txt
  README.md
  apps/
    player_qt/
      CMakeLists.txt
      main.cpp
  libs/
    core/
      CMakeLists.txt
      include/cckit/core/
      src/
    rules_ms/
      CMakeLists.txt
      include/cckit/rules_ms/
      src/
  tests/
    CMakeLists.txt
    core/
    rules_ms/
For Milestone 1, you could even omit player_qt at first and just do core, rules_ms, and tests.
Milestone 1 goal
The target is:
load or construct a tiny level in memory
step the simulation deterministically
support:
floor
wall
player
collectible chip
socket/exit
emit events
test it thoroughly
No Qt board yet. No monsters yet.
Core concepts to define first
I would keep the first pass very small.
Value types
These are the “boring but essential” types.
Position
Direction
TileId
ActorId
LayerId or just fixed roles for now
Example:
struct Position {
    int x;
    int y;
    bool operator==(const Position&) const = default;
};
enum class Direction {
    Up,
    Down,
    Left,
    Right
};
LevelDefinition vs LevelState
This distinction is worth introducing immediately.
LevelDefinition
Author-time data. The blueprint.
Contains:
board dimensions
initial terrain layout
initial actor placements
required chip count
metadata if needed later
LevelState
Runtime mutable state.
Contains:
current terrain/board state
current actor positions
collected chip count
inventory
whether level is complete/failed
tick count if needed
This split will help later with editor simulation and reset.
Suggested classes
In core
Position.hpp
struct Position {
    int x;
    int y;
};
Direction.hpp
enum class Direction {
    Up,
    Down,
    Left,
    Right
};
Position offset(Position p, Direction d);
TileKind.hpp
For Milestone 1, keep tiles simple.
enum class TileKind {
    Floor,
    Wall,
    Chip,
    Socket,
    Exit
};
You may later split “terrain” vs “items,” but for now this is fine.
ActorKind.hpp
enum class ActorKind {
    Player
};
ActorState.hpp
struct ActorState {
    int id;
    ActorKind kind;
    Position pos;
};
LevelDefinition.hpp
class LevelDefinition {
public:
    LevelDefinition(int width, int height);
    int width() const;
    int height() const;
    TileKind tileAt(Position p) const;
    void setTile(Position p, TileKind tile);
    void setPlayerStart(Position p);
    Position playerStart() const;
    void setRequiredChips(int count);
    int requiredChips() const;
private:
    int m_width;
    int m_height;
    std::vector<TileKind> m_tiles;
    Position m_playerStart;
    int m_requiredChips = 0;
};
LevelState.hpp
class LevelState {
public:
    explicit LevelState(const LevelDefinition& def);
    const ActorState& player() const;
    ActorState& player();
    TileKind tileAt(Position p) const;
    void setTile(Position p, TileKind tile);
    int collectedChips() const;
    void addCollectedChip();
    int requiredChips() const;
    bool isComplete() const;
    void markComplete();
private:
    int m_width;
    int m_height;
    std::vector<TileKind> m_tiles;
    ActorState m_player;
    int m_collectedChips = 0;
    int m_requiredChips = 0;
    bool m_complete = false;
};
This duplicates some data from LevelDefinition, which is okay for now.
Events and step result
This is a very good habit to establish early.
GameEvent.hpp
For Milestone 1:
enum class GameEventType {
    PlayerMoved,
    MovementBlocked,
    ChipCollected,
    SocketOpened,
    LevelCompleted
};
struct GameEvent {
    GameEventType type;
    Position pos{};
};
Later you can enrich this with actor IDs, source/destination, payloads, etc.
TickResult.hpp
struct TickResult {
    std::vector<GameEvent> events;
};
Input action
PlayerAction.hpp
enum class PlayerActionType {
    MoveUp,
    MoveDown,
    MoveLeft,
    MoveRight,
    Wait
};
struct PlayerAction {
    PlayerActionType type;
};
This is better than directly passing directions because it scales nicely later.
Ruleset interface
IRuleset.hpp
class IRuleset {
public:
    virtual ~IRuleset() = default;
    virtual TickResult step(LevelState& state, const PlayerAction& action) = 0;
};
That is enough for now.
First concrete ruleset
In rules_ms, create something like:
BasicMsRuleset.hpp
class BasicMsRuleset : public IRuleset {
public:
    TickResult step(LevelState& state, const PlayerAction& action) override;
private:
    bool canEnter(TileKind tile, const LevelState& state) const;
    Position targetPosition(Position from, const PlayerAction& action) const;
};
Expected behavior for Milestone 1
moving into Wall is blocked
moving into Floor succeeds
moving into Chip succeeds and collects it
moving into Socket:
blocked if not enough chips
otherwise acts like open passage or converts to floor
moving into Exit:
succeeds only if socket requirement satisfied
marks level complete
You do not need to mimic exact CC semantics yet. Just make a coherent baseline.
Board storage
For Milestone 1, keep storage simple:
std::vector<TileKind> m_tiles;
with index helper:
int index(Position p) const {
    return p.y * m_width + p.x;
}
Do not overbuild board/layer abstractions yet.
If you want, you can still wrap it in a small Board class later.
Suggested initial tests
You want more tests than code at this stage.
Core tests
position offset works
level definition stores and returns tiles correctly
level state initializes from definition correctly
Ruleset tests
player moves onto floor
player blocked by wall
player collects chip
chip tile is cleared after collection
socket blocks before enough chips collected
socket allows passage after enough chips collected
exit does not complete early if your semantics forbid it
exit completes when requirements met
wait action does not move player
If possible, make small helper builders for tests so they stay readable.
A good testing style
You might define a tiny helper in tests like:
LevelDefinition makeLevel(std::initializer_list<std::string> rows);
where characters map to tiles:
# wall
. floor
C chip
S socket
E exit
P player start
That will make your tests much easier to read.
Example:
auto def = makeLevel({
    "#####",
    "#P.C#",
    "#..S#",
    "#..E#",
    "#####"
});
That kind of helper is absolutely worth it.
What not to add yet
Avoid these in Milestone 1:
inheritance hierarchy for each tile
monster AI interfaces
plugin system
scripting
serialization formats
Qt signals in core
dynamic layers
glitch flags
generic action buses
undo/redo
All of those can come later.
Milestone 1 deliverables
You should consider Milestone 1 done when you have:
LevelDefinition
LevelState
IRuleset
one concrete ruleset
GameEvent
TickResult
10+ tests
tiny console or test harness proving a level can be stepped
That is enough foundation for the Qt prototype next.
Recommended next milestone after this
After Milestone 1, I would do a very small Qt viewer:
render a grid
show tiles as colors or text
use arrow keys to send PlayerAction
redraw after each step
maybe show event log on the side
No fancy art yet.
One small design suggestion
For early code, prefer plain structs/classes over pattern-heavy abstractions. For example:
LevelDefinition
LevelState
BasicMsRuleset
is better than immediately introducing:
abstract tile factories
behavior registries
command buses
service locators
Start concrete, then extract abstractions once you feel the pressure.
If you want, I can sketch the actual header/source list and a minimal CMake layout for this Milestone 1 structure next.
Would it make sense to add a sort of version control to this system? I've seen levels like Hypercomplex Maze where the level designer included different versions of the same level in the set, and there was also You Can't Teach An Old Frog New Tricks where the designer released a set showing the development stages that they went through in designing the different parts of the level
Yes — some kind of versioning/history system makes a lot of sense here.
Not necessarily full Git-like source control inside the app, but definitely a notion of:
level revisions
branches/variants
named snapshots
diffable changes
That fits both the practical editing workflow and the CC culture you’re describing, where alternate versions and design evolution can themselves be meaningful artifacts.
Why it makes sense
There are really two use cases here:
1. Ordinary editor safety/productivity
This is the normal tooling reason:
undo mistakes
recover old ideas
compare two layouts
try risky changes without losing work
2. Intentional level lineage
This is the creative/archive reason:
“v1 of this puzzle”
“harder remix”
“development stages”
“MS-compatible version” vs “Lynx-friendly version”
documenting how a puzzle evolved
That second use case is unusually strong for your project because puzzle design often involves many meaningful intermediate states, not just one final product.
So I would absolutely include revision awareness in the architecture.
But I would not start with “full version control”
I would separate three things:
1. Undo/redo
Short-term editing history within the current session.
2. Snapshots/revisions
Persistent saved points in time for a level.
3. Branches/variants
Alternative continuations from an earlier revision.
That is already enough to capture most of what you want, without implementing a full DVCS.
A good mental model
Think of a level not as one file, but as:
a level identity
plus a set of revisions
plus optional variant relationships
So instead of:
level_17.dat
you conceptually have:
Level: Hypercomplex Maze
Revision A
Revision B
Revision C
Variant: “final pack version”
Variant: “development stages”
Variant: “MS-compatible tuning”
That is much closer to how creators actually work.
What I would recommend building
Phase 1: command-based undo/redo
This is the first and most important layer.
If your editor changes are represented as edit operations, like:
place tile
remove tile
move actor
change connection
modify property
then undo/redo comes naturally.
This is important even if you never add richer versioning.
Phase 2: named snapshots
Allow the user to save a revision with:
name
timestamp
optional notes
Examples:
“before trap rework”
“harder center section”
“post playtest cleanup”
This already gets you a lot of value.
Phase 3: variant/branch support
Allow a revision to spawn a child variant.
Examples:
“Version tuned for MS rules”
“Less backtracking version”
“Development stage 4”
“Contest submission version”
This is where your idea becomes especially compelling.
How this could look in the UI
You might eventually have a side panel with something like:
Level: You Can’t Teach an Old Frog New Tricks
Revision 1: Initial shell
Revision 2: Added left wing
Revision 3: Reworked frog loop
Branch A: final release
Branch B: development-history release
Branch C: easier version
And each revision could optionally show:
note/description
diff summary
preview thumbnail
compatible ruleset/profile
That would be genuinely useful.
This also connects well to your ruleset/profile idea
Because versions are not only about geometry.
A revision might differ in:
layout
actor placement
trap/cloner links
target ruleset/profile
tileset/presentation
author notes
intended difficulty
whether a known exploit is allowed/fixed
So versioning could help support things like:
one layout, multiple behavior profiles
one puzzle idea, multiple implementations
historical evolution of a puzzle
preservation of design rationale
That is actually a strong differentiator for your tool.
What data model would make sense
I would think in terms of:
LevelDocument
Represents the authored project-level object.
Contains:
metadata
current working LevelDefinition
revision history
variant graph or tree
maybe editor-only annotations
LevelRevision
An immutable saved snapshot.
Contains:
revision ID
parent revision ID or IDs
serialized LevelDefinition
metadata
notes
timestamp
maybe compatible ruleset/profile info
LevelVariant
You may not even need a separate type at first. A branch can just be a revision that continues from an earlier one.
So you could model it simply as a revision graph, not just a linear list.
Snapshot vs diff storage
There are two implementation approaches.
Option 1: full snapshots
Each revision stores a full serialized LevelDefinition.
Pros:
simple
easy to restore
easy to export
robust
Cons:
some duplication
For levels, this duplication is probably fine. These files are tiny compared to modern storage.
Option 2: diffs
Store only changes between revisions.
Pros:
elegant
compact
potentially useful for comparisons
Cons:
more complex
harder to debug
harder to recover from corruption
reconstructing old states is trickier
For your project, I would strongly recommend:
store full snapshots, compute diffs on demand
That gives you simplicity and still lets you show “what changed.”
Diffs would still be very useful
Even if revisions are stored as snapshots, the UI can compute diffs like:
12 tiles changed
2 monsters moved
1 trap link added
required chip count changed from 24 to 20
behavior profile changed from MS strict to patched
That is much better than only having “save as version.”
One especially nice use: simulation-assisted authoring
This fits beautifully with the earlier idea of staged commit-back.
A workflow could be:
Start from Revision 12.
Run simulation and make live edits.
Extract staged authorable edits.
Commit them as Revision 13 with note:
“Adjusted block starting positions after playtest.”
That gives a clean relationship between:
simulation changes
staged edits
persistent level history
So yes, these ideas reinforce each other.
Would this be overkill?
Not if you scope it correctly.
What would be overkill:
full merge conflict engine
distributed source control
multi-user concurrent editing
Git clone inside the app
What would be very reasonable:
undo/redo
save snapshot
revision notes
restore earlier revision
duplicate from old revision into a new branch/variant
diff two revisions
That is a very practical feature set.
One subtle point
You should decide whether versioning is:
A. per-level
Each level has its own history.
or
B. per-pack/project
The whole set evolves together.
You may eventually want both, but I would start with per-level revision history, because the examples you gave are about the evolution of individual levels.
A pack can still have top-level versions later, but per-level history feels like the more natural first feature.
One good roadmap for this feature
Early
Implement:
command-based undo/redo
“Save Snapshot…”
Mid
Add:
revision browser
restore snapshot
duplicate snapshot into new working copy
diff summary
Later
Add:
branching/variant tree
notes/tags like “release,” “prototype,” “development stage”
pack export that includes selected history or selected variants
That would already support the “development stages release” idea very well.
One compelling export idea
You could even support exporting:
just the latest version
all tagged revisions
a curated development-history pack
That would make it easy for authors to intentionally publish:
final levels
archived alternates
developmental timelines
That seems very aligned with the examples you mentioned.
My recommendation
Yes, include versioning, but frame it as:
revision history for authored levels, not “source control.”
The first implementation should be:
immutable snapshots
notes
restore
diff
optional branching later
That gives you real creative and practical value without burying the project under infrastructure.
The idea is strong enough that I would treat it as a genuine planned feature of the editor/workbench, just not as part of Milestone 1.
I’d probably place it after:
basic editor
save/load
undo/redo
embedded simulation
and before:
advanced scripting/plugins
If you want, I can sketch a simple revision model and example C++ classes for LevelDocument, LevelRevision, and revision diffs next.